{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\fs28\lang2057\cgrid 
\sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\s3\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{
\s4\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\i\fs28\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\qc\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\fs28\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 Title;}{
\s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext16 Body Text;}{\s17\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext17 footnote text;}{\*\cs18 \additive \super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}}{\info
{\title ATHEROSCLEROSIS SIMULATION}{\author robin}{\operator Poston}{\creatim\yr1999\mo3\dy16\hr19\min33}{\revtim\yr1999\mo3\dy16\hr19\min39}{\version5}{\edmins4}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1927}{\nofchars10989}{\*\company .This one}{\nofcharsws0}{\vern71}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s15\qc\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\fs28\lang2057\cgrid {\cs18\fs32\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s17\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\cs18\super #}{
 Intro}}}{\fs32 ATHEROSCLEROSIS SIMULATION
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\b\fs28\ul Help}{\b\fs24\ul  \endash  Version 1.1; 1/99 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\fs28\lang2057\cgrid {Background
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\b\fs24 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid {
Atherosclerosis is the arterial disease that causes heart attacks, strokes, and circulatory disease of the legs. It is a slowly progressing disease that develops throughout life, and produces its effects in middle or old age. It is responsible for about o
n
e third of all deaths in Western countries, more than all forms of cancer, and so is a very important area for research and for the development of new therapies. When it has become very advanced, the artery wall is damaged.  As a consequence, it becomes c
o
mplicated by thrombosis, the formation of a solid clot within the remaining bloodstream. It is this thrombosis which often finally cuts off the blood supply to the organ involved, and precipitates severe events, for instance heart attacks  (myocardial inf
arction). 
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\b\fs24 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid {
The object of this computer program is to simulate the initial growth of atherosclerosis in an artery wall before thrombosis occurs, based on a current hypothesis for the mechanism of its development. It is an important fact, that needs explanat
ion, that atherosclerosis always develops in focal lesions, called plaques, that contain large number of macrophage cells. The areas of the artery wall between the plaques are virtually normal. The plaques also contain smooth muscle cells, which accumulat
e centrally in the lesions. These cells secrete collagen, and form a tough layer adjacent to the blood, that is called the \ldblquote fibrous cap\rdblquote  of the lesion. 
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\fs24 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid {The basic hypothesis is that the accumulation of macrophage cells in the artery wall is the central eve
nt in the disease. In the initial stages of the atherosclerotic process, all the macrophages are derived from blood monocytes which migrate across the lining layer of cells on the inner surface of the artery wall - the endothelial layer. There is no other
 route for them to enter the innermost layer of the artery wall, the intima, where they accumulate.
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\fs24 
\par Experimental evidence shows that the arterial endothelial cells over plaques are activated, and express adhesion molecules on their surface, to which monocy
tes can bind. This suggested that the growth of plaques might be self-perpetuating, as events in the macrophage-rich plaque may induce the activation of the endothelial cells, and the further recruitment of monocytes. If the macrophages are directly or in
d
irectly responsible for these endothelial-activating events, then a positive feedback loop is created, by which macrophages attract monocytes, which  then develop into more macrophages. These are the events which are represented in the simulation. The sim
ulation demonstrates that this self-perpetuating monocyte recruitment gives rise to focal lesions in the simulation which are strikingly similar to those seen }{\i\fs24 in vivo}{\fs24 .
\par 
\par In addition, there is evidence that macrophages produce growth factors that attract smoo
th muscle cells from the adjacent medial layer of the artery wall into the intima. These factors also induce the proliferation of the smooth muscle cells once in the intima. Thus it seems likely that smooth muscle accumulation is dependent on the presence
 of macrophages, and this is also included in the simulation. The simulation demonstrates that focal collections of smooth muscle cells develop in the centre of the lesions, which strongly resembles the formation of the \ldblquote fibrous cap\rdblquote 
 seen }{\i\fs24 in vivo}{\fs24 , that is composed of smooth muscle cells.
\par 
\par A particular importance of the simulation is that the events it models are potential targets for therapy of arterial disease. Some of the molecular factors involved in monocyte recruitment can be inhibited by drugs, for ins
tance oxidation of lipoproteins in the artery wall is probably involved, and it is known that anti-oxidants have a preventative effect on the disease.  It is likely that there are many other recruitment factors that could be targeted. A scientific paper a
bout the simulation and the pathophysiological events on which it is based is currently being submitted for publication to the journal Arteriosclerosis Thrombosis and Vascular Biology.  
\par }\pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel2\adjustright \f1\lang2057\cgrid {\b\f0\fs28 The simulation
\par }\pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel1\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang2057\cgrid {\f0\fs28 Outline
\par }\pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid {The simulation is written in the computer progr
amming language Microsoft Visual C++. It represents a uniform area of the interior surface an artery wall shown flattened out, how, for example, a piece of aorta would appear if opened longitudinally. Atherosclerotic lesions can be seen easily on an arter
y opened in this way, and this simulation represents this situation, and shows the morphology of the lesions that develop. The computer screen represents an area of about 2 x 1.5 cms.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\fs24 The normal artery wall is shown in red. Single cells are represented as 
occupying individual points (pixels) on the screen, and up to 40 macrophages and 20 smooth muscle cells can be present at one point.  Macrophages as they arrive are shown in shades of yellow. As the number of macrophages increases at a point, the brightne
s
s of the yellow increases. Single macrophages actually appear as dark spots against the red background. Smooth muscle cells are also represented, and appear in the same way as shades of green. If smooth muscle cells and macrophages are present simultaneou
s
ly at a point, then the smooth muscle cells alone are shown, although the presence of the macrophages is included in all calculations. This simulates the tendency of macrophages in vivo to form a fibrous cap on the inner aspect of the wall that obscures t
he macrophages.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel1\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang2057\cgrid {\f0\fs28 Mode of simulation
\par }\pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid {
The simulation when running goes through a large number of cycles of events in the artery wall. The cycle number is displayed. Each cycle represents a time period during which macrophages and smooth muscle cells can be re
cruited to the artery wall, and approximates to about 1 month of human life. Macrophages can also die during a cycle, and are removed from the display. Smooth muscle cells do not die in this simulation, as they are long-lived cells.
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\fs24 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid {The simulation is cont
rolled by several variables that can be entered by the user, and these and their locations are shown in bold in the following paragraphs. All operations are done with the left button of the mouse.  The variables are controlled from an }{\b 
Atherosclerosis simulation data}{ dialogue box: click on }{\b settings }{for it. If the values are not entered, default values are used. These variables can also be stored in \ldblquote }{\b settings}{\rdblquote 
 files, each containing all the variables required for setting and running the program. They insert v
alues into the graphical interfaces described below, which can also be adjusted directly by the user. Several of these files are provided with the program. They are loaded or saved from the }{\b Load/Save settings}{
 prompts.   These files can be explored by the u
ser to investigate the operation of the simulation. The user can also program new settings files by editing existing files (e.g the file default.csv) in Microsoft Excel. Note that settings files and recording files (see below) have the same .csv extension
. 
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\fs24 
\par During each cycle, monocytes collide at random with a number of points on the simulated arterial area. The }{\b\fs24 number of cells colliding with artery wall per cycle }{\fs24 
 is a variable that can be set on a slider by the user by dragging the cursor. The number is 
the total number of points that will then be chosen at random in each simulation cycle for the collision of monocytes. There is a variable probability value for each point on the screen that determines the probability that a macrophage will be recruited t
o that point if a monocyte collides with it. This probability value is controlled by the }{\b\fs24 macrophage arrival probability }{\fs24 function}{\b\fs24  }{\fs24 (click on}{\b\fs24  set arrival chances).}{\fs24 
 This is set by the user, in the graphical interface provided, as a chosen function which is depe
ndent on the number of monocytes influencing recruitment at a point. The user sets the probability if zero, 9, 18 etc macrophages are influencing recruitment to a point. For the simulation to be realistic, it was found that that the initial probability of
 recruitment with no macrophages present had to be a much lower value than those where macrophages had already arrived. Therefore to allow this small value to be entered accurately, it is entered numerically: click on }{\b\fs24 Set 1}{\b\fs24\super st}{
\b\fs24  X-value}{\fs24 . Its smallest value is 1/65535 per collision, or  0.0016%, and a value close to that is effective in the simulation. Finer control of the initial arrival rate is provided by controlling  the }{\b\fs24 
number of cells colliding with artery wall per cycle}{\fs24 . These values are arbitrary, and pr
obably do not correlate well with the situation in vivo, where the number of collisions must be much greater, and the probability of recruitment much smaller. Macrophages can influence this recruitment if they are already present at that point, or at any 
of the adjacent 8 points in the rectangular pixel array. Thus macrophage influence on recruitment spreads laterally over 1 cell diameter. It is the total number of  macrophages with influence on a point that is used in the graphical interface. }{\b\fs24 
Macrophage death rate }{\fs24 (click on }{\b\fs24 set killing rate}{\fs24 
) is also controlled by a user defined function which can be entered graphically. This is a function dependent on the macrophage numbers present at a point. It was evident during development of the program that macrophage
 death was helpful in allowing a realistic simulation, and the facility of making this rate variable with macrophage number (i.e. dependent on macrophage concentration in the wall) was included. There are as yet few experimental data on death rates in viv
o, or of the effect of macrophage concentration on them. 
\par 
\par Smooth muscle cells are recruited to the intima in a same manner as the macrophages. The }{\b\fs24 number of cells available for recruitment to the intima per cycle}{\fs24  is set numerically by a slider, an
d is a similar function to the number of collisions with the wall for the monocytes. The }{\b\fs24 smooth muscle cell arrival probability}{\fs24   (click on }{\b\fs24 set arrival chances}{\fs24 
) is set by a graphical interface, and makes smooth muscle recruitment dependent on the number of macrophages present.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24 Record simulation info}{\fs24 rmation}{\b\fs24  }{\fs24 
is a facility to record the total number of macrophages at each cycle of the simulation. Clicking in the button results in a file dialogue box appearing in which the file name of the file to receive the d
ata has to be entered. After the simulation, clicking on the file name when displayed via the Windows My Computer dialogue box will automatically load it into Microsoft Excel, and a graph can be drawn from it.
\par }\pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel1\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang2057\cgrid {\f0\fs28 Running the simulation
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\fs24 After the start screen, the simulation screen appears. Click on }{\b\fs24 simulation }{\fs24 and the  }{\b\fs24 START!}{\fs24 
 button appears in the dialogue box in the top left corner.  }{\b\fs24 Info}{\fs24 rmation gives the number of cycles run, and the total number of macrophages on the screen. The entering of a number at the }{\b\fs24 Stop at Cycle}{\fs24  prompt in the }{
\b\fs24 Info}{\fs24  box allows the duration of the simulation to be controlled. }{\b\fs24 Settings}{\fs24  calls the }{\b\fs24 Atherosclerosis Simulation Data }{\fs24 window. Once the simulation is running, the dialogue box changes to }{\b\fs24 
Restart, Pause, Info, Settings and Cross Section. }{\fs24 Clicking on}{\b\fs24  Help }{\fs24 reveals two buttons, }{\b\fs24 Contents}{\fs24 , which shows this text, and }{\b\fs24 About}{\fs24 .., which gives version details of the program and authors
\rquote  names and  E-mail addresses. The image of the simulation screen can be transferred to the Windows clipboard by the Alt/ Print Screen keys, and thence into Word for further manipulation.}{\b\fs24 
\par 
\par Cross Section }{\fs24 provides the facility to draw a line with the mouse ac
ross any part of the display in any direction. A graphical display in a window at the screen centre then shows the number of macrophages and smooth muscle cells at all points along the line. Macrophages are shown at the bottom in olive, and the smooth mus
c
le cell graph is superimposed above in blue. A dynamic display can be produced while the simulation is running, or a static one after the simulation has been paused. It will be seen that in the centre of large lesions, the number of cells may reach the ma
x
ima permitted. This feature arose out of limitations of RAM memory, however there is clearly a practical limit on how many cells can be present physically in the arterial wall, or could be close enough to the endothelium to influence monocyte recruitment.
 The window can also be transferred to the Windows clipboard by the Alt/ Print Screen keys.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\fs28\lang2057\cgrid {
\par }\pard\plain \s4\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel3\adjustright \b\i\fs28\lang2057\cgrid {Results
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {\fs24 Under suitable conditions, as provided by the default settings file, atherosclerotic-like focal lesions develop over about 600 cycles of the simulation. The
y have a central mass of smooth muscle cells superimposed on a circular mass of macrophages. Lesions tend to start at different times as the simulation runs, and then grow progressively. Hence they are of different sizes at a particular time. The similari
ty of these simulated lesions to those found }{\i\fs24 in vivo }{\fs24 provides evidence that this simulation is a correct representation of the major events in the pathogenesis of the atherosclerotic plaque.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\fs28\lang2057\cgrid {
\par Computer requirements
\par }\pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \lang2057\cgrid {This program requires a PC computer running
 Microsoft Windows 95 or 98. It was developed on a Pentium 133MHz with 48Mbyte of RAM, on which it runs at about 0.5 - 2 cycles/second. It is slower when there are large numbers of cells on the screen. It will run more slowly on slower computers, or those
 with less RAM. It also requires Microsoft DirectX version 3 or higher.
\par }}